# v1.0 To v1.1 Migration

As part of the v1.1 release there were two significant changes that require a primary store migration:

1. Updates to the event model
2. ElasticSearch default view mapping update for 7.x compatibility

Additionally, due to a bug in the underlying persistence library some events may have been skipped when the `tag_views`
table is populated as a reverse index for event tags.

The migration steps are as follows:

1. Stop the 3 services: iam, admin and kg.
2. @link:[Backup](https://docs.datastax.com/en/archived/cassandra/3.0/cassandra/operations/opsBackupRestore.html){ open=new } the
  cassandra store. This step is a safeguard against anything which could go wrong during migration scripts. It's also a
  good practice to protect from hardware failures.
3. Delete all ElasticSearch indices

        curl -XDELETE 'http://{elasticsearch_host}/kg_*'

4. Delete all BlazeGraph namespaces:

        for i in `curl -s 'http://{blazegraph_host}/blazegraph/namespace?describe-each-named-graph=false' | grep sparqlEndpoint | grep -o --color "rdf:resource=\"[^\"]*" | sed 's/rdf:resource="//' | sed 's#/sparql$##' | grep -v kb | grep -v LBS`
           do curl -X DELETE "$i"
        done

5. Update Elasticsearch software from 6.x to 7.2 or above.
6. Deploy the new service images (tag `1.1`): 
   @link:[iam](https://hub.docker.com/r/bluebrain/nexus-iam){ open=new },
   @link:[admin](https://hub.docker.com/r/bluebrain/nexus-admin){ open=new } and 
   @link:[kg](https://hub.docker.com/r/bluebrain/nexus-kg){ open=new };
   make sure to start the iam, admin and kg services one by one, in order and wait for the service to become available,
   following the instructions:
   *   When running iam and admin services for the first time in v1.1, set the environment variable
       `REPAIR_FROM_MESSAGES` to `true`. This environment variable should be removed in subsequent runs. It makes
       services rebuild the cassandra database from the `messages` table and correcting any problems with the
       `tag_views` table
   *   When running kg service for the first time in v1.1, set the environment variable `MIGRATE_V10_TO_V11` to `true`.
       This environment variable should be removed in subsequent runs. It triggers the event migration, full
       rebuild of the cassandra database from the `messages` table and correcting any problems with the `tag_views`
       table. 

## Migration process

This section explains what happens during the migration process. Although the knowledge of what is happening behind the
scenes should not be necessary to successfully migrate to v1.1, it might be of interest.

### Iam and admin migration process

The migration for these services is straight forward since the changes introduced did not affect the main models in the
cassandra store. The migration is essentially a repair of the cassandra store to make sure that every row which should
be present in the `tag_views` cassandra table, is indeed there. To achieve that, during the boot process the service
wipes all tables but `messages` and materializes all persistent actors found in the `messages` table to force repair
all dependent tables. 

### Kg migration process

The migration for this service includes several steps, since the content on the cassandra store `messages` table
requires modifications as per the description above.

The following steps are executed:

1. all tables but `messages` are wiped
2. all project information is loaded from `admin.messages`
3. all events in the `messages` table are migrated to the new model
4. a full rebuild of the cassandra store is performed by materializing all persistent actors found in the `messages`
   table to force repair all dependent tables (equivalent to the behaviour of the `REPAIR_FROM_MESSAGES` flag for the
   iam and admin services)
5. restart all index processes from scratch

Depending on the volume of data stored in the system, the migration process can take a fairly long time. During this
window the service does not bind on the HTTP port to avoid any de-synchronization.