# v1.10 Release Notes

> This is an incremental software release that adds several improvements across the board.
> The API is backwards compatible with v1.9 except for creating and updating S3 storages
>

//TODO adjust the end date

For the detailed list of updates in this release, see the
@link:[list of addressed issues](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues?&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+created%3A2023-12-18..2024-08-30+){
open=new }
since v1.9.

## Nexus Delta

### Fetching by org and project UUIDs

The legacy way of being able to:

* Fetch/Update organizations by their UUIDs
* Fetch/Update projects by their UUIDs
* Create/Update/Fetch the different types of resources by their project uuids

has been removed.

Only the ability to fetch by their labels remains.

### Projects

#### Enforce the use of a schema

It is now possible to ban unconstrained resource in a project.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/projects-api.md)

### Schemas

#### Return annotated original payload for schemas

It is now possible to return the schema original payload along with its metadata.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/schemas-api.md#fetch-original-payload)

#### Undeprecate schemas

Previously deprecated schemas can now be undeprecated.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/schemas-api.md#undeprecate)

### Views

#### Undeprecate views

Previously deprecated views can now be undeprecated. This is available for all view types.

@ref:[More information (ElasticSearch views)](../delta/api/views/elasticsearch-view-api.md#undeprecate)
@ref:[More information (Sparql views)](../delta/api/views/sparql-view-api.md#undeprecate)
@ref:[More information (Composite views)](../delta/api/views/composite-view-api.md#undeprecate)

### Elasticsearch views

#### New mapping and settings for the default Elasticsearch view

The default Elasticsearch view now uses a new mapping and settings which improves the ability to search for resources
using the listing endpoints.

#### Create and delete point-in-time to use during search queries

It is now possible to create point-in-time on underlying Elasticsearch indices and use them on search queries.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/views/elasticsearch-view-api.md#create-a-point-in-time)

### Files

#### Custom metadata

It is now possible to add custom metadata when creating and updating files. This metadata will be indexed for full-text
search.

@ref:[More information about metadata during file creation](../delta/api/files-api.md#create-using-post)
@ref:[More information about metadata during file update](../delta/api/files-api.md#update)

### Storages

### S3 support

The S3 support for Nexus Delta has been rewritten and new operations are available.

@ref:[More information for storages](../delta/api/storages-api.md)
@ref:[More information for files](../delta/api/files-api.md)

#### Disabling default storage

The creation of a default storage at project creation can now be disabled.

#### Undeprecate Storages

Previously deprecated storages can now be undeprecated.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/storages-api.md#undeprecate)

#### Deprecations

* Storages can no longer be tagged, looked up by tag or have their tags fetched.
* It is no longer possible to provide the storage capacity as it is no longer enforced.

### Resolvers

#### Fetching the annotated original payload of a resolved resource.

The annotate parameter has been introduced to the endpoint to get the original payload of a resolved resource.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/resolvers-api.md#fetch-original-resource-payload-using-resolvers)

#### Deprecations

* The ability to tag a resolver has been removed. It is also no longer possible to fetch a resolver by tag.

### Global search

#### Fetch search suites endpoint

An endpoint to fetch a search suite has been added.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/search-api.md#fetch-a-suite)

#### Search API mapping

An API endpoint has been defined for search views to make it easier to query the composite views endpoint related to it.

### SSEs

#### Deprecations

* The ability to fetch indexing errors as SSEs has been removed
* The ability to fetch all global events as SSEs has been removed.
* The ability to fetch events for global entities (ACLs, Organizations, Permissions, Realms) has been removed.

### Supervision

#### Projects health

A new endpoint has been added to check the health of the projects.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/supervision-api.md#projects-health)

#### Project healing

A new endpoint has been added to heal a project.

@ref:[More information](../delta/api/supervision-api.md#project-healing)

## Nexus Fusion

TODO

