# v1.7 Release Notes

> This is an incremental software release that adds several improvements across the board. The API is backwards
> compatible to v1.6.

For the detailed list of updates in this release, see the
//TODO Update end date 
@link:[list of addressed issues](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+closed%3A2021-10-14..2022-03-08+){ open=new }
since v1.6.

If you are currently using Nexus Delta from 1.6.x, please
visit the @ref:[migration instructions](v1.6-to-v1.7-migration.md) for the necessary steps to successfully upgrade.

## Nexus Delta

The main goal of this release is to provide support for an enhanced search experience in Fusion as well as to introduce
a new extensible model to define Elasticsearch views based on pipes.

Secondary goals include:

//TODO update the links to 1.6.x

- Allow the use of an external configuration file for Delta.
- Allow deleting tags on resources.
- Allow tagging deprecated storages and views.
- Refactor `graph-analytics` plugin to make indexing faster.
- Add a group identifier in Elasticsearch projections of composite views.
- @link:[Terminate support of the Nexus CLI](https://bluebrainnexus.io/v1.5.x/docs/utilities/index.html#nexus-cli). At this stage, no replacement is provided but due to the backward compatibility of the Delta API, the CLI should still work. We will announce when a new CLI is made available.
- @link:[Removal of the docker based client](https://bluebrainnexus.io/v1.5.x/docs/utilities/projections.html). 

A @link:[series of bugs](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues?page=1&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+closed%3A2021-10-14..2022-03-08+label%3Abug+label%3Adelta){ open=new} have also been fixed with this new release.

### Elasticsearch pipes

With 1.7, Elasticsearch views now rely on pipes to filter and transform data before indexing.
This feature was primarily motivated by user requests of our partners at SWITCH, [some usage examples are detailed here](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues/2549).

More details @ref:[here](../delta/api/views/elasticsearch-view-api.md)

This change implies a @ref:[migration when updating Nexus Delta to 1.7](v1.6-to-v1.7-migration.md).

### Allow the use of an external configuration file for Delta

Besides JVM properties and environment variables, Delta configuration can now be defined via a external file.

More details @ref:[here](../getting-started/running-nexus/configuration/index.md)

### Deleting tags on resources

From 1.7, it is now possible to delete tags on resources, files and schemas.

### Tagging deprecated storages and views

Storages and views can now be tagged even after they have been deprecated.

### Graph analytics

Graph analytics indexing is now faster.

If you enabled this plugin in your 1.6 deployment, @ref:[there are migration steps to follow](v1.6-to-v1.7-migration.md).

### KG Dashboard update

In order to reduce the dependencies to third party systems (InfluxDB and Grafana) and further invest in those we already support (ElasticSearch), we have redesigned our Knowledge Graph Dashboard to support the usecase of monitoring the data ingested into Nexus.

A default configuration for this dashboard will [soon be provided](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues/3145) so that everyone can give it a try with minimal efforts. // TODO link to documentation

### Deprecations

In the upcoming version, the support of Cassandra as a primary store for Nexus Delta will be removed in favour of PostgreSQL to focus development efforts on features rather than supporting multiple databases. 
For very large deployments there are commercial options that are wire compatible to PostgreSQL.

Tools will be provided to enable migration from Cassandra to PostgreSQL for existing Delta deployments.

## Nexus Fusion
//TODO Add links to the documentation

### Graph Analytics
Fusion now enables users to inspect properties and relationships of resources in a given project via the new Graph Analytics plugin.

### Studios Elasticsearch Support
Support Elasticsearch and Composite views has been added to Studios. Studios targetting an Elasticsearch view provide the option for more performant Studios compared to those targetting a Sparql view. The Studio data model has changed to support this, see migration notes for migrating existing Studios.

### Search Enhancements

#### Search configurations
Search configurations have been introduced to provide convenient access to apply common search criteria.

#### Support for Numerical and Date columns
Numerical and date type column support has been added providing the ability to filter search results appropriately for these data types.

#### Jump to Studio
The Search bar can now be used to search for Studios and navigate to them directly.

### Better Preview support for PDFs
Enhanced support for previewing PDFs in the resource preview plugin provides the ability to zoom in and pan large PDFs.

### Versioned Links
Resource links to other resources can now be version-specific.

### Remove Tag from Resource
Tags can now be removed from a resource directly in Fusion.

### UI Enhancements
The following UI enhancements have been made in this version:

- Redesigned Resources panel with quick access to high-level details of resource. Plugin opened/closed status is also persisted improving the UX when wanting to view the same plugin(s) for several resources.
- Colour scheme has been updated to better align with our style guide.
- Navigation has moved from the sidebar to the header giving more screen real-estate.


//TODO Update end date 

### Bug fixes

A @link:[series of bugs](https://github.com/BlueBrain/nexus/issues?page=1&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+closed%3A2021-10-14..2022-03-08+label%3Abug+label%3Afusion){ open=new } have also been fixed.

