# v1.8 To v1.9 Migration

## self, incoming and outgoing links

@@@ note { .warning title="Reindexing" }

Reindexing can consume a lot of CPU/memory if many views are indexing in parallel, please proceed by restarting only a subset of them at a time so as to not
overload the system.

@@@

As those links are not shortened anymore (@ref:[see here](./v1.9-release-notes.md#self-incoming-and-outgoing-links)),
we encourage Nexus deployments moving to 1.9 to reindex your different views containing metadata.

This operation can be performing by deleting the offset for the different views by using the different endpoints:

* @ref:[Elasticsearch views](../delta/api/views/elasticsearch-view-api.md#restart-indexing)
* @ref:[Blazegraph views](../delta/api/views/sparql-view-api.md#restart-indexing)
* @ref:[Composite views](../delta/api/views/composite-view-api.md#restart-indexing)

Nexus Fusion also allows to restart the indexing for the different views.

## Composite views

The introduction of @ref:[partial reindexing](./v1.9-release-notes.md#partial-reindexing) for composite views required a model
change of composite views.

If your Nexus deployment relies on composite views or search, the following environment variable need to be set 
when launching Delta v1.9 for the first time:

* `MIGRATE_COMPOSITE_VIEWS`: true

The following logs should appear in Delta:

```
2023-08-24 07:38:24 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.c.m.MigrateCompositeViews - Starting composite views migration
2023-08-24 07:38:28 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.c.m.MigrateCompositeViews - '500' composite views events have been migrated
2023-08-24 07:38:28 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.c.m.MigrateCompositeViews - '31' composite views states have been migrated
2023-08-24 07:38:28 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.c.m.MigrateCompositeViews - '62' composite views states have been migrated
2023-08-24 07:38:34 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.c.m.MigrateCompositeViews - Composite views migration is now complete with (500,62) events/states updated
```

After this completes, the environment variable can be removed and Delta restarted.

## Default Elasticsearch views

As the mapping and setting of default Elasticsearch views have changed, it is necessary to update the views. For this
purpose, set the following environment variable when launching Nexus Delta 1.9.0 for the first time

* `RESET_DEFAULT_ES_VIEWS`: true

The following logs should appear in Delta for each of your project:

```
2023-11-28 16:30:14 INFO  c.e.b.n.d.p.e.i.ElasticSearchDefaultViewsResetter - Created a new defaultElasticSearchView in project 'myorg/myproject'.
```

## Remote authentication

Currently, both remote storages and composite views with remote sources can hold auth tokens for communications with these remote endpoints. In v1.9, we now expect authentication to be dealt with in the Delta configuration

A remote storage might currently have a token stored in the storage definition. In 1.9, this should be moved to `plugins.storage.storages.remote-disk.credentials`, as shown @ref:[here](../getting-started/running-nexus/configuration/index.md#remote-storage-configuration)

A composite view might currently have a token stored in the view definition. In 1.9, this should be moved to `plugins.composite-views.remote-source-credentials`, as shown @ref:[here](../getting-started/running-nexus/configuration/index.md#composite-views-plugin-configuration)

